import streamlit as st
from streamlit.components import v1 as st_comp

st.set_page_config(layout="wide", page_title="Ethics")

st.title("Ethics in the Use and Developement of AI or ML algorithms")

st.markdown(
"""
As AI becomes more accessible as an everyday tool and is incorporated in more decisions that can affect the common good, it is increasingly important to understand the ethics and inherent caveats associated with its use. Whether an algorithm user or developer, it is the responsibility of any who use AI or ML to understand not just the output of a query or model but also the biases that come with it. Every tool has its issues and AI and ML are no different, they have expansive effects on data privacy, security and the environment. 

###To avoid breaches in privacy, ensure data collected by a program is collected, stored, used and destroyed properly. 

In the modern world, the management or mismanagement of data is a global concern. AI is another facet of this which needs to be addressed. Most commercially accessible AI should be  coded with human rights in mind. They are built to maximise safety, fairness and transparency. They also are built and trained using data. Everyone has a right to privacy and a program which takes in personal data at all times and does not safely store or limit access to private information violates this. There is no comprehensive legislation surrounding the use of private data in the training of models but anyone looking to create their own algorithm might do well following the EU guidelines on the subject. They require that the processing of data must be fair, lawful and transparent to the data subject. The data must be collected for an explicitly stated purpose and only constitute as much information as is absolutely needed. It should not be stored with personally identifying information and any processing done needs to be confidential. This checklist can be generalised for an algorithm designer: when building an AI, anonymise personal data and generalise it where possible so as not to attach it to one individual. Only store it for as long as it is needed and ensure that it is then destroyed. This might constitute steps like using pseudonyms for data that is all linked to one individual or using synthetic data sets. 

###Guardrauls need to be put in place to ensure the maintenance of human rights and preserve safety.

Privacy concerns open up questions about the safety guardrails which should come with the creation of any algorithm. As a tool readily available to the general public, AI needs to be as safe as possible. Hardcoding human rights into it does not absolutely solve this issue as human rights covers a broad range of things. From privacy to the sanctity of human life, not all rights have the same weight. This is generally solved by placing emphasis on one right over another: an algorithm should save someone’s life over keeping their data private. However, allowing for violations in an individual's rights poses an ethical dilemma - in the case of life versus absolute privacy the answer is evident but not all safety questions are so clear cut. Careful considerations of the safety of the users of any AI or ML tool need to be at the forefront of their creations. 

###Creating or using AI or ML might make someone accounable for the repercussions of their descisions. 

As AI and ML become entrenched in these difficult decisions, their decisions can lead to controversial outcomes. In the case of a decision where one party feels wronged, the question of who would be responsible for hurt caused arises. In a banal example, artificial intelligence is already being used by the Amsterdam city parking control to determine whether a car can or cannot park in a particular zone and whether a car should be issued with a ticket. If, say, a ticket is wrongfully issued, who would be liable.  AI and MLs are only algorithms and have not made a choice in the ethical sense: they have weighed up preprogrammed factors they were designed to consider. There is no morality associated with the error so the algorithms cannot be held accountable. Accountability can be broken up into legal and moral. Moral accountability concerns intent and measured decision and legal accountability concerns whether the actor has broken a law. Since an algorithm has no moral agency beyond what they are designed with, legal accountability in this case falls on the shoulders of the programmers as the ticket was assigned wrongfully so the parker had no legal accountability to take. This is not always the case. It is usually understood that by using an algorithm, anyone is accepting a small amount of responsibility for the results of this use whether they designed the algorithm or not. Therefore, anyone who deigns to create or even just use a ML or AI algorithm should be aware that they may be held accountable for repercussions from the generated decisions. 

###Anyone affected by AI or ML algorithms have the right to understand how and why – transparency and comprehensibility is key. 

Given that these algorithms are increasingly being used to inform decisions with wide reaching repercussions, it should follow that those affected by the decisions reached with the aid of AI understand how the conclusions were made. Despite this, the tools themselves are often “black boxes”, that is to say the inner workings of the tool are not made available. There has been a global movement to enforce an amount of transparency from the developers. The justifications for the need for transparency are many and evident. If a user of AI can be held responsible for the repercussions of that use, there needs to be an understanding of the biases in code that they are using. This allows them to have an understanding of moral consequences and the potential harm they could cause. There is also a need for justification for decisions made by the algorithm, especially if they affect someone who was not responsible for the choice to use the tool. Finally, there should be a right to know to maintain agency and to ensure maximal understanding for the general population. 

There is a notable difference between transparency and comprehensibility. There is the issue that the AI tools which are widely used and which affect people’s lives are often complex even if the algorithm is not a black box. In general, the push is towards comprehensibility as simply making available the code that goes into these models does not allow the people affected by it to understand what is done and how. Therefore, when designing any models or algorithm it is important to keep in mind who the algorithm is for and who it could affect and adjust how it works accordingly. This might involve breaking down the model into smaller components which are more easily understood by the general public or using simpler models or including graphical or plain speak explanations of the steps involved. When making a model transparent to the public, it should be kept in mind that complete openness is not always the solution as it might also lead to data breaches and privacy concerns. 

###Understand the biases introduced to the AI and ML by the developer and the data set used to train the algorithm.

AI and ML tools can be powerful agents of good but can just as well perpetuate harmful stereotypes. AI can be easily used for inclusion and accommodation purposes. It has many applications in daily life to help those affected by a disability and can help open doors to those with less opportunities. It should however be kept in mind when coding one of these aids that not all users will be equally able to use the tools. This is due to the fact that all models are limited by the data they have been trained on. Take for example farming. UNESCO finds that women are statistically less tech literate than men. Even in spaces like agriculture, even in places in the world where women make up the majority of the workers, the male minority is more likely to use more advanced technology to help their tasks. Consequently, the data pool for the users of this more advanced tech is male dominated and the design is skewed towards a male user despite this not being most useful. 

For a more extreme example, in the United States, more individuals from marginalised communities are arrested than from non marginalised communities. This is not to necessarily say that there are more people in these communities committing crimes but rather that there are more people being caught committing crimes. An algorithm trained off arrest data asked to pick out a criminal from a line up would therefore be more likely to choose the marginalised individual. All AI or ML algorithms are trained on data. All data sets are a product of the time at which they were collected and target a set of parameters. Therefore, it is practically impossible to train an algorithm on a complete picture. Bias will always enter the equation. The bias can perpetuate harmful discriminatory bias, such as in the last example where the data set the algorithm was trained off did not include the data set of all individuals who committed crimes, or the data set of the likelihood of a marginalized community being patrolled by police. There can be bases based on lack of data as exemplified by the farming example. There can be cultural biases introduced by say a data set collecting surnames of individuals which limits the number of characters for the name to be greater than 2 or to not include letters in the English alphabet. These biases were not necessarily introduced with a malicious goal in mind but they can have massive negative effects. 

The goal when choosing a data set to train a model on is always to be fair and holistic. Fairness is another point of consideration though. Take exam grading. During the COVID pandemic, students were unable to sit their exams and their scores were determined using an algorithm. This algorithm took into account predicted grades but also factors such as socioeconomic area of the school and prior performance. This led to students at schools who were set to outperform prior cohorts being awarded lower marks than they were predicted in the name of fairness. 
When creating or using an algorithm the ideal would be to acknowledge the viewpoint from which it is created and attempt to account for any biases that it might create. This is not a catchall of course so peer review or crowd sourcing might also help. 

###AI is not good for the environment – it consumes a lot of energy and water and should not be used if it can be avoided. 

Beyond ethical considerations surrounding the inputs and output to these models, there should also be acknowledgement of the environmental impacts the data centers needed for AI or ML algorithms. There are two issues driving these impacts: the energetic need and the water need. AI and ML use GPUs over CPUs to run given the large processing power needed. The larger processing power translates to a larger energetic demand for the data centers where the server racks are stored. This energy is largely obtained from fossil fuels, a non renewable source which is well known to lead to global warming and environmental damage. It would not be possible to instead use renewable energy sources due to the variability of the energy demand. Equally, it is currently not feasible to use nuclear power: the infrastructure needed in the generation of nuclear energy is not present near the data centers and the time frame needed to build it rules it out as a solution for the problem in the near future. There is no clear way to make the energetic demands of AL or ML not be damaging to the environment. 

AI or ML also need large amounts of water to function. The water is used in the manufacturing of the server parts - ultrapure water is used to clean parts in the manufacturing process, it is also used in the power plants that provide electricity to the data centers and finally it is used in the cooling of GPUs. CPUs can be cooled with air cooling but that is not efficient enough for GPUs. Furthermore, cooling must be done with fresh water as salt water clogs the systems. To reduce the water need, it would be better to use a contained cooling system which would not need the constant injection of more fresh water but this is not commonly used as it is a more costly system. It would also be better to change the manufacturing process to use alternatives that do not need water. The main concern with these impacts is that both the high energetic and water demand of these data centers diverts these resources from more useful areas like providing drinking water and electricity to local communities. 

###Further Reading 
- [“The Ethics of AI” - an online course by the University of Helsinki](https://ethics-of-ai.mooc.fi)
- [“How AI reduces the world to stereotypes” - an interactive article](https://restofworld.org/2023/ai-image-stereotypes/)
- [“What I Mean When I Say Critical AI Literacy” - a critique by Professor Maha Bali](https://blog.mahabali.me/educational-technology-2/what-i-mean-when-i-say-critical-ai-literacy/)
- [“Power, Heat and Intelligence - AI Data Centers Explained” - on energetic and water needs](https://huggingface.co/blog/sasha/ai-data-centers-explained) 
- [“Environmental Footprint Estimator” - an app](https://sites.google.com/i-biology.net/ai-footprint-estimator/home)
- [“Calculating the cost of ChatGPT”  - by Christ Pointon](https://medium.com/@chrispointon/the-carbon-footprint-of-chatgpt-e1bc14e4cc2a)
- [“AI-generated deepfakes are moving fast. Policymakers can't keep up” - by Shannon Bond](https://www.npr.org/2023/04/27/1172387911/how-can-people-spot-fake-images-created-by-artificial-intelligence)
- [“AI Is Coming For Commercial Art Jobs. Can It Be Stopped?” - by Rob Salkowitz](https://www.forbes.com/sites/robsalkowitz/2022/09/16/ai-is-coming-for-commercial-art-jobs-can-it-be-stopped/?sh=7de80a1154b0)

"""
)
