import streamlit as st
from streamlit.components import v1 as st_comp

st.set_page_config(layout="wide", page_title="Intro")

st.title("Introduction")

st.markdown(
As AI becomes more accessible as an everyday tool and is incorporated in more decisions that can affect the common good, it is increasingly important to understand the ethics and inherent caveats associated with its use. Whether an algorithm user or developer, it is the responsibility of any who use AI or ML to understand not just the output of a query or model but also the biases that come with it. Every tool has its issues and AI and ML are no different, they have expansive effects on data privacy, security and the environment. 

###To avoid breaches in privacy, ensure data collected by a program is collected, stored, used and destroyed properly. 

In the modern world, the management or mismanagement of data is a global concern. AI is another facet of this which needs to be addressed. Most commercially accessible AI should be  coded with human rights in mind. They are built to maximise safety, fairness and transparency. They also are built and trained using data. Everyone has a right to privacy and a program which takes in personal data at all times and does not safely store or limit access to private information violates this. There is no comprehensive legislation surrounding the use of private data in the training of models but anyone looking to create their own algorithm might do well following the EU guidelines on the subject. They require that the processing of data must be fair, lawful and transparent to the data subject. The data must be collected for an explicitly stated purpose and only constitute as much information as is absolutely needed. It should not be stored with personally identifying information and any processing done needs to be confidential. This checklist can be generalised for an algorithm designer: when building an AI, anonymise personal data and generalise it where possible so as not to attach it to one individual. Only store it for as long as it is needed and ensure that it is then destroyed. This might constitute steps like using pseudonyms for data that is all linked to one individual or using synthetic data sets. 

###Guardrauls need to be put in place to ensure the maintenance of human rights and preserve safety.

Privacy concerns open up questions about the safety guardrails which should come with the creation of any algorithm. As a tool readily available to the general public, AI needs to be as safe as possible. Hardcoding human rights into it does not absolutely solve this issue as human rights covers a broad range of things. From privacy to the sanctity of human life, not all rights have the same weight. This is generally solved by placing emphasis on one right over another: an algorithm should save someone’s life over keeping their data private. However, allowing for violations in an individual's rights poses an ethical dilemma - in the case of life versus absolute privacy the answer is evident but not all safety questions are so clear cut. Careful considerations of the safety of the users of any AI or ML tool need to be at the forefront of their creations. 
###Creating or using AI or ML might make someone accounable for the repercussions of their descisions. 
)
